what's up everybody welcome to another
episode of conversations with Tom I am
here with Daniel Shmack Tim burger and
dude you were the guy that showed up on
my feed when I started researching the
end of the world which is a pretty
fascinating thing to become known for
and I'm super curious how did you you
you've touched so many different things
from the neuro hacker hacker collective
and self optimization and actually
creating businesses how did you end up
getting so deep into civilizations and
how they fall apart what a good
civilization is and how to improve
things in our world I would say was my
interest since I was young and kind of
the center line so how to improve how
young are we talking while I was very
fortunate to be homeschooled growing up
and homeschooled in a way that's closer
to what people would call unschooling
now or I didn't have a fixed curriculum
so I got to study what I wanted and so
seeing the things that seemed like the
biggest problems in the world and
finding out why are these things like
this was actually what got to be my
curriculum so very now are were you
taught by your parents or did they have
give you access to actual teachers my
parents facilitated and sometimes I'd go
to a public school or a private school
for a while but they were very actively
engaged in how I was processing the
information and then other times finding
tutors and other times just working with
books it was before internet so I
couldn't Wikipedia things but we
certainly use books and encyclopedias
and and fortunately what was their logic
did they not like school they didn't
think it was going to be a good
education what was the reasoning yeah
they they were kind of educational
philosophers intuitively and had the
sense that kids ask lots of questions
they have a deep curiosity in school
mostly doesn't facilitate their
questions and so when the kid asks why
is the sky blue and why is fire hot and
what our emotions and whatever questions
they ask they're actually very deep
questions that if you want to address
why is the sky blue
there's atmospheric science there's
understanding the wavelengths of light
there's understanding the nature of our
solar system and astronomy and what a
Sun is and then there's the neuroscience
and optics and eyes and there's like a
lot that goes into it that naturally
starts to unfold
that helps people understand a lot of
topics and also an interconnected rather
than fragmented way if you follow the
curiosity but most parents and also most
teachers don't know how to answer those
things and so then I was gonna ask how
did your parents answer that like if my
kids ask me and now that I have kids
keep mind but if my kids were to ask me
a question that I didn't know the answer
to I'd be like yeah let's get you to
public school real fast because I don't
want to keep answering these questions
so did one of your parents stay home
yeah both of them worked to work from
home as much as they could be pretty
available and if they didn't know the
answer then it was let's go see how to
figure that out and so that would be you
know going to the library and pulling
out cards to find the right book pulling
up encyclopedias also something even
better was them asking me why do you
think it might be how do you think it
might be so my answer was not instantly
just defer to outside authority was to
take the interest and facilitate my own
thinking on it but then to not just stay
there because the answer I come up with
might be totally gibberish but to
investigate so it was facilitating
interest and facilitating the process of
learning how to deepen the knowledge and
deepen the interest as it goes and of
course as you learn some things you
become aware of how much other adjacent
stuff that's interesting you don't know
is and so if you do that and you don't
force the kid to focus on and memorize
stuff with fear of punishment that they
have no interest in then you don't break
their interest in life and you actually
facilitate deepened interest and people
tend to become good at things they
really care about that yeah that is a
powerful thing when I think about part
of getting good is building desire and
if you can capitalize on something that
you're already on fire for and I've
heard you talk about this in the
perspective of how you create that next
civilization you likened it to an iPhone
it's like you don't have to convince
people to get excited about technology
like it works and it brings some benefit
to your life and so people just adopt
things that they're really into I'm
super curious oh you I think you have a
brother right or by coincidence there is
a guy on the board of one of your
companies with the exact same last name
is it just the two of you or they're
more so what's the age difference three
years younger
so how did your parents handle that was
he just sort of forced to come up to
your level did they split it up and
talking to one of you at one time and
the other another like I said they had
kind of intuitions about things that
were wrong with society that related to
how we developed humans and that kind of
was a sense of how to do education
differently how to do parenting happy
family differently but it was very
experimental they actually called our
family guinea pig for their four of us
and was an experiment and it didn't have
the benefit of studying Montessori and
Waldorf and lots of other systems that
had figured some things out so there
were a lot of mistakes that could have
been prevented but they were also the
benefit of they were in their own kind
of authentic inquiry and interest it
happened that my learning style innately
worked with what my parents knew how to
do better than my brothers did and so he
had a bit of a rougher go because I
think they expected his path of being
more similar to mine and it took a
little while for them to figure out that
he had a very different set of interests
and learning style
he ended up excelling at entrepreneurial
ISM and political activism and things
that were not my areas of focus once you
kind of figure that out do you have kids
and don't so that would have been
interesting to see like how you handle
that have you given a thought to how the
way that you came up and the fact that
it wasn't crushed out of you
could be systematized it could be
something that could be rolled out about
that of course so what is that in terms
of the ideal school system what does
that look like I think it's less to
think about it as an ideal school system
and as a civilization because by the
time the kid goes to school they've
already been profoundly imprinted right
by the time they're 5 or 6 years old and
they're going to 1st grade or
kindergarten or wherever it is they
start they've already fully learned the
language in which they think and all of
the ways that that language predisposes
patterns of thought they've already
learned that the beginning of emotional
dispositions and social values and lots
of things and then obviously if the
educational system has to prepare kids
for the
workforce so we think about economics as
it is then it has to do certain things
that are not necessarily what would make
them the healthiest happiest people if
it's preparing them for a workforce as
the workforce changes through
technological automation and peak
resource issues of the planet and AI
automation and other things like that
obviously the role of education gets
completely recontextualized so instead
if you were to ask how would we redesign
civilization from scratch that included
the thing we call education but also we
mostly evolved in small bands and
villages where we didn't just have two
parents that were influencing us we had
a whole crew of people that we had
pretty deep connections with sub Dunbar
kind of connections is even the nuclear
family within a very large city
metropolis where you don't know hardly
anyone else but have interactions with
lots of people and then the mostly have
huge numbers of superficial interactions
via online social media platforms like
is that how what does that do to develop
humans so this question of ontological
design we build environments whether
it's schools or economic systems in the
nature of the incentive of economics
right as long as my ability to as long
as the forest I go and enjoy the forest
gives me no economic advantage but if I
cut it down and commoditize it it gives
me a lot of economic advantage the
economic system itself the perverse
incentive in the economic system is
conditioning value systems and people
and whoever does better at getting the
value systems that go along with the
economic incentive system will end up
getting more power within the system and
thus continuing to evolve the system in
the direction that benefits them and the
other people do well with it so if you
think about let me ask you so that I can
make sense of the world view so
everything that gets designed has a goal
in mind so when you first started
talking I thought that your punchline is
going to be sort of happiness health of
the individual is that accurate or is it
more the perpetuation of the species is
your if you had to say a highest value
would it be that a happy and healthy
populace that you know like imagine the
the movie was a children of men where
there are no more kids and so population
is basically the world's just ending
because they're not able to procreate
anymore but imagine that but it was like
everybody was having a great time right
until the moment they died or a
civilization where people are not
exactly loving life but we find a way to
get in balance with resources and we're
able to go on and on and on which of
those to you is better I think you set
it up to make it obvious that those are
both gibberish desires that a
civilization that is in an enduring hell
like well I won't go that far I'm really
trying to find the perfect way to ask a
question where I can find out if it's
more meaningful to you to find a way to
continue on and so because I'm looking
for what to optimize for and you can
optimize for continuation you can
optimize for happiness you obviously I
would assume want to do both but I'm
trying to I find it it is very edifying
when you force people to force rank
things so that you can't have sort of
two number ones because I I now have
spent enough time in your world and sort
of where you go I know sort of the the
ending points of some of the arguments
but I'm super curious as to what is the
the big driver for you in terms of how
you think about waking up in the morning
and constructing a civilization
optimization theory itself is one of the
underlying problems this is actually
super important to indulge me a moment
here yeah if we do the thing you call
stack ranking which is an idea that
comes from computer science if I think
about computers and I'm stack ranking
trying to optimize things in a software
system that software system is a
complicated system as opposed to a
complex system and I'm going to define
those formally the difference the
software and the hardware runs on didn't
self organize right we didn't get
spontaneous self-organization of
hydrocarbons into proto cells themselves
we got somebody did the lithography to
make the computer chips and there's a
blueprint for the hardware and a
blueprint for the software in a
complicated system you'll notice like
this computer and the software doesn't
repair it
so if it gets harmed it doesn't self
evolved and the phase space of all the
things that can do are fully explicated
and it has formal causation if I hit
this key this will happen necessary and
sufficient causation in complex systems
like biology there isn't a blueprint the
genome isn't blueprints it's a generator
function to code new proteins under new
environments where you can have it do
things that it's never done before if
you expose it to a novel pathogen or a
novel environment right so a generator
function and a blueprint aren't the same
thing the in a in a complex system also
it does self heal and self repair it
does also self evolve it's a it's
different in type so optimization Theory
from complicated systems the metaphor
where we thought our mind was a clock
when we figured out clocks before that
Native Americans might have thought of
the mind as an ecosystem right but then
we got a clock now known the mind is a
computer so we pick whatever the
metaphor that we're operating with this
but where the metaphor is wrong it
really [__] stuff up and so it can give
you some very partial insights and also
some really dreadful differences so the
definition of a complex system is that
it has some emergent properties beyond
what any complicated model of it assumes
that the complicated model doesn't show
so basically if I take a cell and I try
to model it right so I try to make a
software program for how that cell works
the cell will do some things that that
model doesn't do and as I keep making
the model better it'll keep doing some
things that the model doesn't do that's
what we call an emergent property right
so what that means is if I make a model
because the my model of reality isn't
reality that's the first verse of the
daodejing
right the DAO that is speakable is not
the eternal doubt my model of the thing
isn't the actual thing so if I think the
model is the thing and then I try to
optimize for the model where the model
and the thing are different I actually
destroy the real thing can you put that
into real-world example I make a
economic calculus I make an economic
system for humans or these rational
self-serving agents and they follow
specific supply and demand economic
models and laws I can get more advanced
things to be able to look at the laws of
how they'll do with things like
derivative at blacks goals whatever but
they're basically simple mathematical
laws and say here's how we optimize
maximum productivity and generativity
for everyone and they don't work right
like they kind of work and then they
also lead to environmental destruction
which wasn't part of the metric set so
that this is where I'm why I'm trying to
get you to stack rank things which is
interesting that for you that's where it
breaks down for me to understand what
you mean when you say it doesn't work I
have to understand what you're trying to
optimize for so once I understand
because I in the beginning when I first
started diving into you I thought okay
this is about optimizing for what all
sort of round to human well-being but I
think there's an important caveat in
there which to you it is sort of beyond
critical and and I think the whole
meaning and purpose for you is that as
long as it is not a hell that
continuation is is a critical thing that
you that is sort of behind every word
that you say but I'm not sure I'm
interpreting that right
okay so let's say that we're maximizing
for subjective happiness decoupled from
objective measures and so we're going to
find some types of states that we can
subjectively report on it well then the
matrix might actually be the best way to
optimize for it right
disconnect from any kind of object of
reality outside of brain stimulus and
just brains to make the [__] out of the
dopamine urge ik response and say great
we optimized for human happiness and I
don't think anyone actually thinks
that's a maximally meaningful world or
if we say maximize for the happiness at
the individual level well some
individuals might be sadists and really
get off on hurting lots of other things
if we say maximize for continuance a
continuance that is really shitty it's
like why what is meaningful about life
that you would want to have continued so
what you're what I hear that you're
trying to ask is what is fundamentally
meaningful what is if we cannot I won't
use the word optimize but if we can act
in ways that benefit different things we
can say optimize but what you can end up
saying is that it's not optimizing a
single metric let me let me actually
make that clear let's say that I value
the life of rhinos and I don't want them
to go extinct and then
also value the life of coral and they
don't want it to go extinct but I also
value kids that I don't want to starve
in the third world and I also value
subjective happiness of poets now how
many dead rhinos are worth how much dead
coral are worth how many dead kids are
worth how much lack of happiness are
worth how many tons of co2 how do i
commensurate those metrics to then be
able to say what my optimization
algorithm is going to optimize for I
have to do some kind of waiting and then
I say well but in the context where the
Rhinos get below a certain number
they're worth more but then when they
get above a certain number they get oh
but then I didn't even account for all
the things these soil microbes without
which everything dies and I didn't even
account for them and this isn't now I
gotta bring soil microbes into it and
then I didn't account for the fact that
subjective reporting will have these
biases or miss these things or orient
towards addiction so whatever my
optimization said is there will be
things that are matter that are outside
of it that I have to continuously bring
in so the optimization is for the
evolutionary integrity of the whole or
wholeness itself which is different than
how we think of theory of optimization
so do we care about people's subjective
experience yes you also care about
objective metrics of the quality of
their life like longevity and physical
health and things like that yes also
care about that do they correlate
one-for-one no there are some very happy
people who are crippled then there are
some very physically able people who are
miserable there are some people who are
happy who make other people miserable
and so and do we care about just
individual quality of life or also the
relationships what about happiness
versus evolutionary rate what if we
could be happy but stagnate versus
evolve quite quickly but never enjoy the
things we were evolving to and we all
have this in our own life right like if
do I want to be bettering myself but in
a way where I'm bettering myself because
of the driver that I'm a piece of [__]
who's never enough so I always have to
get better but I never actually enjoy
any of it or do I accept myself in a way
that makes me complacent well obviously
it's neither of those I want to enjoy
what it is fully and have my love of
life have me want to keep growing not
because of a dysfunctional driver right
so I'm optimizing for if anything the
product of the dialect
of my experience of life now and my
ability to experience life more deeply
into the future
now if I take both sides I say I want to
in I want to be able to enjoy the beauty
of life as fully as I can now I also
want to be able to add to the beauty of
life for other people I also want to
deepen my capacity to experience the
beauty of life and add to it being doing
and becoming and then you say how do we
optimize for a virtuous cycle between
the modes of being doing becoming
individually and collectively now we
start to get in the right direction so
basically this [__] is complicated so
when I think about so you I don't know
how much you think of yourself is being
tied to game B but certainly your name
comes up a lot with this whole idea of
game B it'd be great if you can quickly
sort of break down what game a is what
game B is and then what I find
interesting is okay Ken what one it do
we believe it to be conceivable that we
can actually construct realistically
game B by putting systems or whatever it
is that's going to be in place there but
first I think people have to understand
what it is and then we can go down the
road of that conversation so if you
don't mind really fast
what's game a what's gonna be the term
game B was coined by Jordan Hall and the
Weinsteins and Jim rut and a number of
other people that were brought together
at Santa Fe Institute back in the day to
think about a new civilization that had
fundamentally new and better
characteristics and so in Contra
distinction to the idea that this thing
which is obviously the US civilization
today and a hundred years ago in the
u.s. versus Chinese civilization are
different but they're all part of a meta
system that has certain system
dispositions like environmental
disruptions happening across the whole
thing wealth inequalities happening
across the whole thing so game a is
basically the idea of game theory which
is individual people individual
corporations individual races nations
whatever competing against each other in
ways that mmm maximize their benefit as
much as they can even if it harms or
externalizes harm to other players or
the Commons
so roughly game
a is a civilization that emerges
dominated by game theory game which is
basically what we're living in right and
there was a recognition and I wasn't
part of that crew I made friends with
them after they actually disbanded that
thing and then it kind of recycled and I
was working on similar things in a
different context so game B is the idea
what would the game be what would the
kind of game dynamics or how people show
up in play of a game that doesn't orient
toward self-determination so we'd have
to unpack a bit why we would say game a
does intrinsically self-terminate what
are the properties about it to say what
would categorical solutions to those
look like yeah so I don't know I'll
answer the question at least as I
understand it basically of a world with
finite resources where you are
incentivized so whaling is a great
example I've heard you use before if you
capture that whale then you can sell it
you can monetize it if you it has
basically value to take it out of the
ocean as zero value in the ocean and
even if you were to say no no I want to
live in the world where the whale stays
in the ocean there's somebody else who
goes how all right [__] I'm
gonna go get the whale then so now it's
like you're gonna lose the whale anyway
so you might as well be the one that
takes it and in a world of infinite
resources you could actually get away
with that but in the world of finite
resources as you say it it ends itself
eventually so you will run out of
resources specifically because it's not
that me seing the whale in the ocean
doesn't provide any value to me that I
call value I might feel a sense of all
seeing it right I might feel a sense of
interconnectedness or beauty or whatever
it is but that doesn't increase my games
here at a capacity to do anything I
can't extract and exchange that value
that experiencial value but if I kill
the whale and I sell it as meat and I
get that money that I can then go buy
weapons or building materials or employ
people with that actually increases my
power so there are kinds of value that
are extractable and exchangeable
extractable accumulated will
exchangeable that increased power and
there are types of value that are
appreciated but don't increase power so
those who orient to the power increasing
value end up getting more power and then
dominating the system dynamics so then
that creates a race to do that thing
because like you said if I don't kill
the whale I I'm not
protecting the whale because somebody
else is gonna kill the whale now those
guys might actually be my enemies and
use that increased economic ability
because they're gonna feed more people
their population is going to grow and
then they're gonna come kill us on war
so actually for my own security not only
do I have to now kill the whale I have
to race to get them faster than that guy
because now we're in a growth race which
also means I'm gonna advance whaling
technologies to be able to take way more
than I need grow my population base
start exporting to other population
bases so that I can get the optionality
of money to build other kinds of things
with and so what we end up giving is
being able to see the industrialized
fishing mechanisms that we have
operating today that can fish more fish
in a single net than maybe all of human
history could in a year you know at
previous points of human history and
it's like the that kind of arms race
multiplied by the ability to keep
increasing the tech and when everybody
increases the tech whether it's military
tech you build an AI weapon I have to
build AI weapons encounter AI weapons or
I lose by default and then I have to try
to get an advantage on you because you
probably have some advantage you're
trying to get the secret to have to spy
on you I have to lie to your spies and
hide the stuff and I have to try to keep
advancing it but when you're advancing
your weaponry and so in mind I'm
advancing relative to you you're
advancing on the base of what exists you
get a compounding curve which is an
exponential curve and we've only
recently started to get to the vertical
icing part of that curve started to go
steep with the Industrial Revolution and
then it started to go very steep with
the information kind of revolution so
we're just in a phase of what has really
been a process that started since stone
tools it was just a very slow curve and
the stone tools thing for a long time
and now it is in the quickly vertical
izing so the thing is when you look in
nature you see well animals compete they
don't increase their competitive
capacity rapidly or irrespective of each
other right the tiger can't just become
way better at hunting it has a pretty
fixed killing capacity and it can only
get better through natural selection
which is a pretty slow process but the
key is that it's a slow process that is
evenly distributed across the whole
forest because the things that lead to
gene mutation and the tiger also leads
to gene mutation in the deer
the slightly faster tiger that eats the
slightly slower deers makes the better
jeans the faster jeans and the deers in
breed together and so everything steps
up together very slowly in the whole
environment does what happened with
stone tools as humans were able to
increase our per day dove capacity way
faster than the environment could
increase its resilience to it and so we
could start extinct ting species and
devastating whole environments turning
them to desert and moving on that was
the beginning of something very
different so when we think of social
Darwinism where we try to model
ourselves as apex predators we're just
not [__] apex predators apex predator
theory doesn't apply because in Orca can
kill a tuna at a time and it misses my
time we can pull up a hundred thousand
of them in a fishing that at once and so
since the Orca can't destroy it whole
ecosystems and we can if we keep
modeling ourselves with apex predator
theory and having to exponentially
increase or destructive capacity
exponential destruction whether in the
form of extraction pollution or military
destruction or disinformation and you
start getting into the space of being
able to win through information warfare
ends up destroying the Commons so one
thing I want to I want to put a fine
point on that you just said that I've
heard you say this before and I've
missed until just now
is what's causing that ever escalation
is because you're doing that in concert
with people who are essentially your
enemies so like with AI it it almost
certainly will be a winner-take-all game
because if somebody can beat you by a
month and for a computer that's like a
hundred years worth of learning you can
see how just being the first is there
gonna be the victor and so now you've
got the sort of ever escalating desire
to either protect yourself or to
monetize and thusly the tragedy of the
Commons so this is part of the reason
that I was trying to figure out sort of
what you value most because for me
everything comes down to if you want if
you want to build a business I will
speak in those terms which I understand
very well you have to have a goal you
have to know what you're trying to
accomplish and the clear the goal the
more likely you are to hit it and if you
don't have a clear goal then you're just
sort of steering by a vague sense of
what you want to accomplish and it's
going to become very difficult but there
are what I call the physics of being
human and the
what I'm obsessed with this humans are a
certain kind of way their you're having
a biological experience your brain is a
certain way it processes data in a
certain way and whatever you do has to
align with the reality of what humans
are like and so going to game B and
thinking about constructing that and
building something it's like when you
were describing how interconnected
everything is how complicated it is it
really gives me pause about like
thinking about Jesus man to really do
something it is going to be it's going
to be really [__] difficult and when
I when I go back through and look at the
people that were a part of the game a
game B conversation it's like I'll be
very interested to see if ideas keep
coming out and they're iterative and we
find a way to actually migrate to an
entirely new approach I mean it would be
a new financial system it would be new
architecture at every conceivable level
of society and my first question is what
are we aiming at like what what is it
that we're I want to say optimize but I
know that that trips something that I
don't fully understand yet but what are
we steering towards I can give you a
very concrete set of examples it will
make this make more sense
let's take Cove it and say when we're
the CDC or the White House or the whu-oh
or whatever institutions are trying to
respond competently to it what should
our goal be what are we trying to
optimize for well let's say we pick the
goal of optimizing for the least deaths
from kovat okay so we will definitely
institute quarantines and contact
tracing and a bunch of things it will
decrease total transmission well there's
a chunk of that that we did that led to
the breakdown of the supply chains for
food and we're still in the middle of
that rolling catastrophe and the new
cycle has moved on to other parts of the
role in catastrophe so we weren't paying
attention to it but when we wanted to
stop travel because the virus can travel
with stuff right well that meant that we
stopped the the shipment of pesticides
to areas that complete
depending upon pesticides there
agriculture so northern Africa and parts
of the Middle East got covered when the
worst locusts in recent history because
they didn't have pesticides and they
lost a huge amount of crop we stopped
the flow of fertilizer to places in
India and other areas that make the food
supply for hundreds of millions of
people and they lost crops we also
stopped the ability to ship food from
where they were to where they need to
get so huge amounts of them just rotted
we were actually culling animals right
killing thousands of pigs in millions of
chickens and whatever when people are
going hungry in other parts of the world
because we couldn't send them to
McDonald's if people are going to
McDonald's we didn't know how to supply
chain route them on the other side and
so we just were dealing with no change
in demand no change in supply and a
complete break of the food system right
now we damaged the food system in a way
that pertains to about two billion
people
Kogan could have never killed that many
people so if we're optimizing for don't
let like the least people die from kovat
we can destroy the world or we mmm so
that's the example of what I'd call a
second-order effect right the it wasn't
the or an unintended consequence or an
externality the the solution that we
implemented to a narrowly defined
problem or optimization goal caused a
worse problem so when we define our
goals in very narrow ways like make
maximum amount of money from the thing I
can do the wailing and destroy the ocean
right if but is that way you hear me
saying because I'm not I'm not saying it
needs to be narrowly defined I'm saying
what is like what is that as as somebody
who is really [__] thoughtful about
this topic how do you think about those
second-order consequences third-order
consequences like that crazy biome of
interconnected things now now that how
do we think about the interconnectedness
how do we think about not one thing that
matters but all the things and the
relationships between them and then
think about how to make not just
individual choices but whole complexes
of choices that benefit all those things
and the relationships is how we start to
think about it properly and it's a much
higher level of complexity of thinking
so when I think about Co vid goal think
okay well we want to minimize the total
number of kovat related to us all right
but there are people who can die and
recut I mean there are people who can
get it and not die but have permanent
disabilities in terms of damage to heart
or lung or kidneys or whatever we'd also
like to do something with that
preventing ICU overwhelm was actually a
really critical goal before prevent
total number of deaths because the death
spike would go up radically so you have
to think about upstream ones Wells
downstream ones but then we start to
think about okay let's make sure that in
doing that we don't damage other things
significantly so when people are on
quarantine how much does domestic
violence go up what happens to addiction
patterns for kids who don't have school
and just have six months of solid screen
time what happens to an economy where we
you have 40 million jobs that go that
are lost now we see a lot of violence we
always see more violence whether it was
systemic racism as the trigger or other
triggers when we always need more
violence when people are out of work
yeah right so I'm being met by a system
they don't stay complacent with the
system that's failing them so if you
think of this as like four or five
dimensional chess like where where is
the human animals capacity to deal with
this like are we actually going to be
able to get people to think in that many
ways we're already failing to do it with
kovat do you think that that is when I
go back to the physics of being human I
begin my hypothesis is I'm not sure I'm
not sure that we'll be able to I take I
take a very optimistic view of most
things but on that one
whew building a brand new civilization
without people first having to suffer a
level of in tolerability seems tough
seems tough to get them to believe the
things that they would have to do to
leave the whale in the ocean or whatever
you know example we're going to use do
you have thoughts around how we give a
simple enough narrative that people can
latch on and understand okay cool I get
what we have to do here
for the most part we aren't even trying
to think about second or third order
effects currently like it's not even a
thing we try to do do you think nobody's
thinking about it or the people aren't
listening cuz it's not sexy like when I
think about what's going on right now
so with everything that was shaking down
with the death of George Floyd and how
everything sparked off that I started
like really looking into I didn't want
to just say some [__] to say
[__] like I wanted to actually
understand like really truly what's
going on so I end up seeing this
discussion about the difference between
Martin Luther King jr. and Malcolm X and
now Martin Luther King jr. had a
meta-narrative which was religion it was
about unity but he was measured and I
mean he was very passionate obviously
when he spoke but it was like this sort
of calming soothing thing about bringing
people together whereas Malcolm X was
black power there was energy there was
aggression it was tapping into that
anger that was right there below the
surface there was nothing
counterintuitive about it and so he was
able to really get people motivated and
rallied and I thought that's interesting
like when you think about human animus
there's something that pisses you off
and it gives you the energy I mean
literally the world was burning last
week and you gave people just a little
bit of a justification to tap into that
there is something about tapping into
that aggression that level of animation
there's an intoxication to rage and when
you can even just nudge people a little
bit into that you get that so my thing
is I hear people talking you're talking
about this crazy eloquently but is it
giving people that sexy level of
animation to to get visceral to tap into
something that's aggressive and that
feels so powerful I think about the
house that I'm in right now it probably
took about a year to build and I could
take it down with a wrecker ball in
minutes or fire it takes 20 plus years
to grow an adult human kill them in a
second
it's easier to break [__]
and the motivational complexes that
break [__] and motivational complexes
that figure out how to build complex
things aren't the same so yes there's
power and can you give me a little bit
about what the motivations are you've
talked very well about human motivations
status seeking like earlier when you
mentioned power I almost stopped you
because I wanted you to actually define
what is power why do we give a [__] I
think it would help people it would help
me I want to understand what is the
difference specifically in those
motivation types
I can't stay enraged for all that long
in a certain amount of time I can say in
rage long enough to break this house but
I couldn't stay enraged long enough for
that to be the motivation to build it I
was [__] yeah and the rage wouldn't
be the right frame of mind for me to
learn the structural engineering to make
the blueprints or to try to have evolved
metallurgy to be able to make bigger
buildings that had better trusses that
requires a very different frame of mind
that is doing planning over a longer
period of time and for the most part the
limbic process you're describing in the
prefrontal process I'm describing are
inversely proportional in the brain the
degree to which you're in one is the
degree to which were mostly not
accessing the other and so what kind of
motives are useful for what kind of
goals as an important question and to
the degree that we want to build things
that have complexity long term we have
to be able to access the places of our
mind and capabilities that can think
long term and complexly can we nudge
people in a direction okay that's
actually a great question that I want to
take in a slightly different place can
we merge people in a direction is a very
interesting question which is so who is
the we that would be doing the nudging
and who is the people that some we is
saying we want to influence them we want
to
we want them to think and feel
differently and change their behaviors
for some goals we have that they may not
have how can we change their goals and
change their behavior and manipulate
their emotions do you want me to answer
that question sure
so that this is exactly what I have
given my life to which is I for a long
time I tried to help my mother change
and my mother smoked my entire life
morbidly obese she's amazing and I want
her to live as long as humanly possible
and I as I say you can lead a horse to
water but you can't make them drink and
then people say focus on making them
thirsty and I'm like oh my god it's all
amazing yes I just need to make my mom
thirsty this is gonna be amazing make
her want change and I realized I can't
and now it may be that I just suck and
I'm not able to find that thing in her
so it got me obsessed so I people that
are that have followed me will have
heard this many times forgive me but I
really I had at my last company had a
thousand employees a group hard as hell
in the inner cities like [__] crazy [__]
and shot my sister shot in the heart
with an ak-47 in my front yard I held my
stepfather while he bled to death from a
gunshot wound to the head another kid
hid under a car while his best friend
had to hold his intestines in from a
point-blank range shotgun blast I mean
it's just story after story after story
is insane so I started thinking okay how
do I help them make change some people
you can just tell them think like this
act like this they do it it's radically
transformative it opens up avenues of
learning and growth and it's amazing but
I'll say that's about 2% of people at
least with my skill level 98% do not
they hear the information they may even
get excited about it might be spiritual
entertainment but they don't do anything
and so over the course of a month like I
remember so many of them would show up
to a book club not put on by me put on
by other people they would get amped up
but then they wouldn't read the books
they'd stop showing up so it was just
like it it's just so short-lived so I
started asking myself the question no
[__] what would it take to give
somebody a growth mindset even if they
were antagonistic to a growth mindset
and I thought okay if I can solve for
that which by the way I have not but if
I can solve for that somebody who
doesn't want to change
not only doesn't they're not apathetic
they're actively opposed to changing if
I can find the magic sequence of things
of words of whatever to get that person
to be like oh my god like I can actually
do something I can learn I can express
myself whatever but now I'm moving in a
positive direction where before I was
moving in a negative direction so it it
is I have come to the conclusion with my
desires and skillset the storytelling is
a way to do that so I think a lot about
nudging people like how much can you
shift the pop culture narrative in a non
sinister way but to have a kid so the
more I looked into it the more I
realized yo I need to hit kids at the
age of imprinting I'm not talented
enough to do this with adults that are
truly antagonistic but if I can actually
get somebody who is at that stage where
they're a sponge they're drinking things
in and I can introduce them to
characters ideas thoughts the way that
Yoda led me to the daodejing which I've
heard you talk a lot about I became
obsessed I self-identified as a Taoist
but all because of Yoda so it was like
when I read the first page of the
daodejing I was like oh my god this is
Yoda so it was like I was so instantly
connected to it so that has given me
that obsession to be like maybe you
really can nudge people like maybe you
really can plant these ideas at the
right time and things from there will
blossom I don't know if I'm high on my
own supply or if that's actually real
but it gives me so much hope that that's
why I'm keen so I am the this sort of we
of like I'm well intended but maybe
there's a second or third order
consequence and I'm about to [__]
everybody up I am very open to that but
well-intentioned the goal is to give and
what I think of as an even playing field
I'm a game a person I'm super open I
want somebody to show me there's a
better way but I'm I'm sort of locked in
game aches I don't know any better I'm
I'm again happy to admit that that's
just part of an evolution and I'm stuck
there but I'm I'm at game aid trying to
find a way to get more people to play
game a well in a way that is supportive
and uplifting to other people but that
is the Wii and the people that are
antagonistic are the day
that I'm trying to nudge in a positive
direction through a story you think the
Chinese Communist Party wants to nudge
the worldview of people in the US in
particular directions yes through
influencing media and what happens
social media yes do you think Russia
does yes Iran Turkey North Korea do you
think they'll winning them there
I would assume study project Mockingbird
which was when the CIA started
influencing Hollywood was when Hollywood
started become a very powerful force in
psycho [__] we need to make sure these
memes do the right things and predispose
particularly when the counterculture
movement started to take off and there
were parts of it they were dangerous to
US interest because people protesting
against Vietnam and some of those ideas
needed to be shifted mm-hmm so how do we
use emotionally compelling things that
use narrative because our evolutionary
biology works with story well to be able
to control humans for the purposes that
we care about is a very ancient story we
just have much better tools to do it now
and I would say the narrative warfare
the war between controlling what people
get emotionally riled up about so that
they serve an agenda whoever it is
that's creating the narrative warfare
and they don't even realize it and think
it's their own agenda because they're
being nudged narrative warfare and
mimetic warfare and info warfare is the
brunt of the unconventional warfare
happening in the world I would say that
it's fair to say that today and this is
easier for people to hear today than it
would have been three months ago
because cities are on fire in the places
where we didn't expect cities to be on
fire and because the upcoming election
in the US currently stands that no
matter who gets elected a solid third of
the population will think it was stolen
the Democrats are stacked up with that
by the way it's dealing in and the Trump
supporters are set up to think the Dems
are trying to steal it so whether anyone
steals it or not a third of the
population will think it was doing so
what the [__] happens from that so
either you get massive
if you don't get massive violence those
who want to stay elections now know
fully that they can with no
repercussions and how do we actually
create the confidence both in the
integrity of the elections and everyone
knowing it when the information
landscape is as fractured and the
narrative landscape is as fractured as
it is okay so what I would say is that
we are in World War 3 currently that's a
bold statement it's not a kinetic war
meaning bullets it's an unconventional
war have go go read the doctrines on
unrestricted warfare that Chinese
Communist Party and PLA published or
unconventional warfare the u.s.
published 99% of war isn't kinetic it's
economic warfare its narrative and info
warfare its cyber warfare its political
and diplomatic and supply chain and
trade warfare and kinetic is kind of the
last part that will back it up kinetic
used to be a bigger percentage of the
story than it is now because we didn't
have powerful cyberattacks and we
couldn't do narrative warfare as
powerful as we can now because social
media is just [__] amazing for being
able to control minds detour on that
social media will control minds and move
people into war even with no-one wanting
it to exist
okay so if you haven't had Tristan
Harris on the show or discussed with him
the issues around Facebook algorithms
and Twitter and tick tock is even worse
you should but I'll do the very brief
version here
you go on Facebook the total amount of
info published on Facebook no one could
ever possibly look at so your newsfeed
you can scroll for a long time and not
see it all and it represents almost no
percentage of what's on Facebook so when
you see Facebook and when I see Facebook
we think we're seeing the world we're
not seeing the world we're seeing a very
carefully curated AI algorithm curated
world now Facebook wants to expose you
upfront to enough of the things to see
your likes and see your hover patterns
of your mouse because once your mouse is
hovered nothing once you've liked a
couple hundred things it can predict
what you will like better than your
spouse can and it's important to
understand that the kind of AI is that
are optimizing the social algorithms are
better than the AI is that beat Garry
Kasparov at chess yeah that's nuts
and he's so much better at chess than
you are at it had anything control in
mind right and he knew he was at war
when you don't even know when you're
going on Facebook that it's not just a
tool that you're using it's an agent
that wants to control you that's using
you and so what happens is its desire is
to maximize the knowledge about you that
it can sell to marketers and to maximize
your time on site that it can sell as
attention to marketers so you will spend
more time on site when your limbic
system gets hijacked than when your
prefrontal cortex that remembers your
goals and you don't want to spend a much
[__] time on Facebook stays engaged
so this stuff that scares you and
enrages you and elicits your greed and
your horniness will make you spend more
time on site then the things that make
you think complexly about stuff and so
what ends up happening is people
whatever it is that would emotionally
get them which appeals to their current
biases is what they get more of and they
get driven in more extreme directions in
all directions so the right gets more
right the left gets more left and you
get both and tifa's and boogaloos coming
out of it as the without any political
goal at all really fast I've heard
people say boogaloo I don't know what it
means a particular alright group that
identify as acceleration is that warrant
civil war in the US they believe they're
ready that they'll win that it's eminent
until they want to accelerate the
movement toward civil war to get on with
rebuilding the country why they called
boogaloos long story there's a bunch of
names boogaloos Hawaiian shirts started
as big igloo boys but memes coming out
of Fortune okay but they go from porch
into Facebook now so it's important to
understand that this algorithm that's
happening on Facebook it's also
happening on Twitter and Instagram and
tik-tok and YouTube why'd you say that
tik-tok is the worst as the social media
platforms evolve they are evolving to be
able to appeal to younger audiences more
effectively in competing against the
other one so whatever is the
addictive that gets them to engage the
most is what it gets optimized for on
the supply side right if I have an MBA
and I'm running a company I know that I
want to maximize the lifetime revenue of
a customer I also want to maximize the
total number of customers so multiple
the number of customers multiplied by
lifetime revenue is my desire so on the
supply side there's nothing that would
be better for me than addiction of my
customers to my product and then being
able to make the widest population
adicted possible right and this doesn't
just happen with social media this
happened with fast food fast food is
extract the most addictive things from
food from an evolutionary perspective
salt fat sugar mix them together in the
right combinations and the palatability
remove all the nutrients so that it
doesn't even fill you up so you keep
eating it and you you have what's called
a hyper normal stimuli right you get a
bigger dopamine hit from that than you
ever would from a salad and then the
salad doesn't you get no joy from where
you would have before because you're
actually desensitizing to normal stimuli
through normalizing hyper normal stimuli
which is why when you watch enough porn
you can't eroticized with normal women
right and so porn and fast food and
social media and are all basically
optimizing towards hyper normal stimuli
because from a supply side it makes me
more money I maximize lifetime revenue
and the people have to keep coming and
getting a hit and what will appeal to
everybody well social media knows that
we're social primates and that we're
lonely and that what we want to spend
all our time doing is looking at other
people's faces and like seeing other
people and engaging and yet real
interactions are vulnerable and
difficult so to be able to take the part
of the interaction which is where I get
a like on the thing I posted and I get
to see the Photoshop versions of their
faces and then other limbic hijacks and
be able to optimize for that remove all
the nutrients of actual authentic human
interaction that's what you get and so
each of the new platforms that has to
emerge in the presence of the existing
platforms has to offer some new hyper
normal stimuli yeah the social media is
is something that so it's weird because
I've built my business around social
media if you'll grant me I guess that
YouTube falls into the social media
category
which is my primary focus but that's
rapidly become the only one that I
really spend a lot of time on as just an
individual there is something about the
way that it the the endless scrolling
like if I do it enough when I fall
asleep I have this sense of like motion
almost but like a very disquieting sense
of motion almost like a fever dream if
you've ever had a fever dream that's
just [__] loops so I was like man I
can't I can't keep doing this
so yeah that the what is happening to
minds especially of kids with the change
in social media like I'm always wary of
being like you know the old fuddy-duddy
who like kids today but when I the thing
that freaks me out I want you to imagine
a world with VR porn and a device that
moves in conjunction with what you're
seeing in the VR porn that of course is
affixed to the more sensitive bits that
you have and when I think about I I'm
not kidding Daniel I wouldn't have
graduated high school certainly not with
the GPA that I did I if my parents left
I would have had that out so fast like
the when you can construct different
people different partners every time
that you go in like exaggerate different
features like peak shift which I'm sure
is something that you know about like
you can just peek shift something until
it is dysmorphic and your your brain is
actually wiring to that thing and when I
think about like one of the
recommendations that I have for couples
if you want like so my wife and I've
been together almost 20 years and my
recommendation to couples is always yo
you need to have more sex I can just
tell you right now like if you want a
good long-lasting relationship the neuro
chemistry that cocktail that you get
from intimacy is crazy but if you've
been living in a VR world that is like
your brain has wired to it it is
normalized to it and then so that was
the first one that I sort of put my
finger on it was like whew I'm glad I
don't have kids cuz that one really
[__] scares me like hey parents I
used to joke like all the time
people that I knew that had kids like
man when your kids 14 this [__] is gonna
get weird like where technology is going
it is going to get weird and if you
don't think that there are repercussions
for that like men it is that one's
worrisome but now as I back into just
social media in general and what what it
must be like to be 12 or 13 I remember
as a kid if you were gonna get sort of
gossip bullied they might spray paint
something on the bridge that we all
drove under to get to school and that
was like the height of oh man like you
just got burned but now that people can
create an anonymous account and gang up
on somebody at the school that is so
gnarly you ever come across the term
stochastic terrorism never so if you
read Sun Tzu where you read the
thirty-six stratagems or any kind of
text on military theory and it doesn't
have to be Chinese can be anywhere give
the enemy to weaken himself is always
one of the high principles and so if you
can see that there's internal dissent
within a people or a culture or
corporation or whatever and you can
increase that internal dissent great
right if the goal is to be able to win
game a competitively relative to them
because you're competing for the same
scarce resources whether it's global
control or actual physical resources or
whatever else so the caste ik terrorism
you've got groups of people who are very
disaffected who find each other online
in a 4chan group or an H n group or in a
Facebook group or in a chatroom of
various kinds and talk about hating
blacks or hating whites or hating police
or hating whatever it is we're hating
the kids at school well if I am a state
actor or a non-state actor jihad
terrorist or whatever I can make fake
sock puppet accounts go in there and egg
them on right share more stuff that
pisses them off and gets them upset tell
them what a hero they'll be if they do
it and it's what we call stochastic
terrorism because I don't know exactly
who will do what harm
at what point but I'm increasing the
statistical likelihood that more people
will do more harm and if the goal is to
be able to deal legitimate the enemy or
weaken them or whatever that's so easy
right that's so easy I've never used to
be easy like that as easy as that is
it's also easy for any Intelligence
Agency to just watch where the groups of
people that are talking about stuff are
and be able to share more interesting
stuff to see what people are thinking as
honey pots for information sharing so
the thing about the arms race is that
the tools escalate right but we don't
have even distribution of the use of
those tools and as a result the total
asymmetries get more severe and the
whole idea that this increased tech that
right now I have a computer that gives
me access to more information than
presidents had 10 years ago if I know
how to use Google searches and that my
phone has super computing power if I use
Amazon Cloud or that's mostly just silly
because yes it's true that that Tech has
decentralized capacity in a way but
nobody's using their phone to use Amazon
Cloud for super computing capacities to
do what groups do with supercomputers or
not that many people are using that
they're just [__] scrolling Facebook
and getting their mind hijacked and
thinking they believe things that they'd
that they wouldn't believe otherwise
right we're thinking or having emotions
or whatever they're being nudged for
agendas other than what is good for them
or and so when there's so much
information right oh these bricks showed
up in the protest well they were put
there by the cause to incite people to
Ryan so the cops could use violence and
they were put there by the far-right and
to blame on NT feh no they were really
put there by aunty foe no they were put
there by Soros they were put there by
Chinese agents they were put there by
organized crime they were how do you
[__] make sense right look at your
speed and depending upon who you curate
that you get one of those things if you
try to do a good job you'll get all of
them you'll get overwhelmed and bail
right so either you'll get limbic lis
and cognitively hijacked into nonsense
and be certain that it's true and be
willing to go take that and rage action
on it or you'll just be overwhelmed have
no idea so when there's so much info and
so much disinfo
and there's so much noise until a little
signal but the signal there is is
disaggregated I don't have all the
signal in a place well aggregated for
actionable Intel access to info isn't
what empowers you the ability to info
process to parse the signal from the
noise aggregate the signal have
actionable Intel well people don't
really have that equally if you think
about a top tier quantitative hedge fund
and their ability to do AI empowered
high speed trading with information that
comes from lots of private intelligence
agencies and big data analysis and the
ability to front run other large ones
with algorithmic warfare in dark pools
on derivatives compared to your ability
to understand the market and try to
invest we're talking about so many
orders of magnitude difference that you
have no ability at all to play their
game when I hear a great Dalio talk
about that and he's like look you're
trying to to play a game that I'm
spending hundreds of millions of dollars
to play and you you can't win and he i
I've met him a couple times and he seems
like sincere like I really think he's
trying to keep people from putting their
hand on the stove and getting burned but
it's like he has that peek behind the
curtain of just the like you said that
that description he's living so my
question becomes how are you making
sense of all this like you're a just a
ridiculously intelligent person you can
obviously process data very very well so
the average person maybe can't do
exactly what you do but I think it would
be edifying to hear what you do I would
love to say things the average person
can do perfect everything's a term that
doesn't actually make any sense to me I
don't know average people but something
that anyone can start doing
progressively more if they want to to
understand the world better and the
preface for that is if my map is wrong
and I'm trying to navigate I'm not gonna
get good results right so I my ability
to make good choices is it depends upon
my values what I think is a good choice
which you're asking about earlier but
also depends upon what I think the
actual reality is in the state of play
and then what I think the effects of
particular actions will be does it be
the thing
does it invoked our response of the
other side that is that I'm trying to do
something against it's more intense does
it create second and third order effects
that are worse
so like strategy 101 if you aren't
factoring counter response right you
have a goal you whether it's black lives
matter or its climate change whatever if
you recognize that your goal is not
shared by everyone and you aren't
factoring counter response you aren't
doing strategy you're just being
emotionally hijacked into playing a game
for reasons you don't even understand if
you aren't factoring second and
third-order consequences you're probably
making the world worse and so that all
means you need to slow the [__] down now
this doesn't mean inaction it means the
possibility of effective action now
feeling effective and being effective
aren't the same thing
truth and so people have to get off the
addiction of wanting to feel effective
and actually step back and say wait wait
do I even know where what I'm going
towards do I understand the lay of the
land do I understand the various forces
and do I have a path that makes any
sense at all so our ability to do choice
making well depends on our ability to
sense make well which is why controlling
people sense making is the heart of the
war that's happening and the forces that
are said this is an important thing in
terms of narrative and info warfare and
you asked what is power power and a game
a sentence is power over other people
and there's a lot of ways of getting it
some are more evil than others slavery
is a particularly bad example but the
economic servitude if I can employ you
and when I'm employing you you are an
extension of my will you are no longer
doing your own well that's still an
example of how do I get power over
people to advance some goal that I have
right and when we look at left-right its
power of that political party to control
as many people as possible to get them
to vote away so there's the power over
the left and right against each other
and their power over their bases to then
be able to have power as a nation over
other nations and of classes over other
classes and those types of things right
because ultimately if I didn't have
other people that could do [__] on my
behalf I couldn't do that much stuff
like if I have to make
with my own hands I can't do that much
stuff so if I want to do more stuff I'm
looking at how do I get more people to
be able to do that okay so when we start
to realize that rather than try to
control people's behaviors directly
influencing what they feel and what they
think and what groups they're engaging
in that will ongoingly use groupthink
to affect what they think and feel is a
much more powerful way than the brunt of
the warfare the power game becomes
control the hearts and minds of people
now when you're talking about making
more Yoda's you aren't trying to control
the hearts and minds of people to do
your bidding you're trying to say how do
I needs them in a direction where they
will become more sovereign in
self-determining as opposed to become
more part of my in-group so what I would
say is that that is trying to use the
tools of power to actually make the game
of power less pathological which is a
legitimate thing to do and a good thing
to do typically the tools of power if if
I have asymmetric power over somebody
else and I get a lot of benefit from
that I have the capacity because of that
asymmetric power to continue to get more
of it and I have the motive to so any
business is not just focused on
providing the thing they provide but
increasing their capacity to do stuff
and in some places that will be Omni
positive and in some places will be
driving externalities I we celebrate
because we just cornered the market
which mean we drove a lot of people out
of business and they can't feed their
kids and we manufacture demand for
people to want [__] that they didn't
want before that doesn't actually make
them happier now knowing although your
logic but how do people employ this to
actually make sense that makes sense yes
okay understanding these things already
will help that's why I was starting to
bring it up when you understand more
about that the as much more capacity as
the top-level economic players have than
you the top-level narrative players and
information players
and they're engaging in that then you
realize that people's minds are the
battlefield and also the treasure that
is trying to be achieved and also the
weapons right and so it's important to
be like oh wait to what degree in my
sovereign self-determining agent to what
degree am i thinking I'm a sovereign
self determining agent that is actually
being influenced in ways I don't even
recognize
dude this is scary man this is like some
your mind has been hijacked and you are
now acting in the interest of somebody
else I don't know why but that just
really hit me as you were explaining
that like are my ideas my own there was
a band back in the 80s called queens
Reich and they were the first people
that really got me to think critically
so I definitely owe them a debt of
gratitude and they had this whole
concept album around this guy that was
controlling people's minds by basically
getting them addicted and then helping
them clean up but then like hey I did
this for you so you're gonna do this for
me it's really terrifying when you
couple that with what you were saying
about social media and how you've been
essentially groomed to push they've
pushed you in a direction that you
started right depending on what you
hovered over and what you clicked on
like some you are very involved in this
process but the them optimizing right
second and third-order consequence is
them optimizing for time on site the
ability to leverage you to a marketer
but to do that they're optimizing you in
a very specific direction and that that
is allowing either bad actor state
actors algorithms whatever to hijack
your emotions your limbic brain to get
you to do whatever like that should
scary like when I think about the the
thing about what's kicked off with the
riots like protesting I love them all
for it when it kicked off into like
looking out my window and seeing things
burning it was like that's where I go
okay like you that [__] that gets really
scary really fast and when you get into
the weeds of like the complicated who's
actually breaking the windows who's
actually setting the fires and
the sort of swirl of very difficult to
parse apart things presents itself to
you that's where like understanding how
to begin to extract the information how
to learn about something that you don't
know about there was a lot of pressure
to speak out and I was like I'm not
saying [__] until I understand what's
actually going on and even just going
into that and beginning to realize okay
this is a big world this is complicated
there's there isn't a party line like
it's being presented there are a lot of
different thinkers across sort of every
statement that's being made there's
somebody that disagrees with it quite
vehemently so my strategy for that and
I'd be super curious to to hear what you
think on this so I've got what I what we
talked about earlier the physics of
being human so any any data point that I
take in has to jive with what I know is
true about humans and the way the humans
act and think and process and when I see
people just repeating mimetic statements
over and over and over
it's like odds are that's not an
original thought for you because you're
just repeating the same thing and then
also looking at both sides of the
argument so it's like I know how
algorithms work because as a person with
a youtube channel like you have to
understand how it works to make sure
that your stuff is getting presented to
people so you learn real fast what the
algorithm likes what it doesn't you
learn what the algorithm is using as a
barometer of whether this is something
that should be pushed out more so you
pay attention to that stuff so I'm like
I know if I watch this type of voice I'm
gonna get more of that type of voice so
then you've got to actively seek out the
other side and there's been so many
times I'm like whoa like that's
brilliant coming from you know side-a
and then wow this is brilliant coming
from side B and so it's like until I get
a sense of like the edges right okay
this is edge case over here this is edge
case over here now I actually understand
filtered through what I know to be true
of the way that the human mind works
now I think I'm beginning to understand
this thing and I can begin to sort of
try out my own ideas and that's what I
do then the next thing so I've taken in
all this data the next thing I do and I
my poor family one of the coolest things
that come out of quarantine has been we
now I do these weekly calls with
different people
and I try out ideas on them and I'm like
yeah this is how I'm thinking about this
what do you think and I begin to realize
where oh [__] I thought I understood
this but like my own logic is breaking
down and in having to articulate it I
realize sort of where the edges you know
of my ignorance are and that helps me
then okay this is where I need to go
research I need to figure this out more
but I don't have a particularly useful
way of going oh [__] that was all false
propaganda to begin with do you have a
way of like are there certain outlets
that you trust how do you build trust
maybe that's the easiest way trust
around information I would say that the
idea that there are any authorities that
I just trust enough that I can
cognitively offload the process of
coming to belief to them is not a real
thing currently and that if you think
about legitimate authority whether
whatever scene is legitimate Authority
for a while it was the Christian Church
or government or then the academies and
the you know the great Ivy League
institutions and they're supposed to be
the bastions of what is true what's
[__] powerful so everyone who wants
power has maximum incentive to try to
capture and co-opt legitimate authority
towards the purposes and so you start
funding the research institutes to
research certain things and not others
and even if so I can easily manipulate
statistics to say most anything I want
to I can cherry-pick that out of very
large data sets to say everything's
getting better everything's getting
worse or whatever it is that I want to
say we can of course do false
methodology in lie but we can even have
information that is totally true that is
miss representative and will guide
people in the wrong direction because
let's say I have a phase space of
information that's all this information
but I'm intentionally only doing
research on this area over here and
publishing a bunch of research the pond
endurance of data points to such and
such because there was an uneven
distribution of what funded based on
those dollars came from somewhere and
they're seeking return on investment and
so certain things are going to be more
useful a patentable pharma drug is going
to give more research dollars than a
plant-based nutrient that no one can
patent to ever be able to pay the money
back so the preponderance of data will
say nutrients don't work as well as
Harmon drugs do but the preponderance of
that is gibberish in that particular
case and then also what metrics was it
looking at well it didn't cause any
negative side effects because we look
for these for side effects well the body
is pretty [__] complicated you can
cause lots of side effects that are
outside of those few measures so as soon
as you understand the process of
legitimate Authority having a maximum
incentive to get co-opted then you start
understanding okay this idea that I can
offload the cognitive complexity of the
world to an authority where I can
continue to have a childlike
consciousness and find the parent who
will tell me how the world is and what
to do stops being a desirable goal and
the desire to take the responsibility to
make sense to increasingly make sense of
the world myself now that doesn't become
solipsistic where I think I'm not gonna
pay attention to people who spend a lot
of time studying but let's say I'm
looking at Co vid and I'm looking at the
topic of viral origin did it come from a
wet market naturally zoonotic li did it
come from gain-of-function research
accidentally or intentionally bio
warfare or let's say I'm looking at
conferred immunity well getting it
confer immunity so we'll reach our
immunity well getting it confirm unity
for some people but not others or for a
short period of time where will not
actually create enduring herd immunity
or will it create a de antibody
dependent enhancements where then one of
the normal corona viruses will kill you
next time you get it nobody knows you
can tell you from looking at the
research the answer to that is not known
and so all the stuff on Sweden's about
to reach her term unity or this or like
is all just people overextending what
could actually be known so one of the
key things is being able to identify
what things do
we have high confidence on based on what
process and what things do we not have
high confidence in just acknowledging
that so that's a question I'm always
asking what are the knowns and what are
the things that we know we don't know or
at least we and the knowns are never a
hundred percent certain right there's
some Bayesian confidence margin less
than 100 percent but I can say high
confidence based on this process but I'm
still open to new data and then here's
the area of unknown so I want no
certainty at all here because any
certainty at all even a hunch can bias
me in terms of what I pay attention to
so I just want to say I don't know do
you try to eliminate even your hunches
like do you all the hunches you try to
what I try to run all of it I see so if
I say there's a virologist who thinks or
an immunologist who thinks one thing we
will get immunity and someone else
thinks we won't and based on different
ways that they're waiting data so do I
pick do I think that experts who spent
thirty years studying a field more smart
know things I don't that I should listen
to that is different than like what a TV
personality who doesn't know anything
about things yes so I like will find
experts who disagree but that seem
earnest as opposed to seem like they are
doing some piece of propaganda and then
I like to see the dialectic where I
think possible you gonna have to tell
people what a dialectic is how does it
different how is it different from a
debate so yeah this is important topic I
saw you and Eric Weinstein discussing
this a bit so dialectic is the idea that
you can have a couple different
perspectives that each have some truth
value in them but maybe neither of which
are the whole truth and they're rather
than a debate where the idea is one of
them is true one isn't and there's going
to be some kind of rhetorical warfare
and then someone will be the winner at
the end there's ACO exploration coming
from different perspectives to see can
we actually find the higher-order truth
together doing this I'm super obsessed
with this so the the idea of trying to
find a higher-order truth that this is
you want to know what really grinds my
gears the fact that do people not give a
[__] about what actually works like I
swear to god people just want to be
right and as somebody who used to be
stuck in that loop I get it I have
empathy I
[__] have empathy but man everything
in my life changed when I stopped trying
to be right and I started saying because
my thing was I was and trust me when I
get the example I'm about to give you is
like game a to the max but when I was
younger my focus was entirely on getting
rich but I wasn't acting I wasn't acting
like I wanted to get rich I was acting
like I wanted to be right and so there
was a day where they collided and it was
like I was arguing for an idea in the
business because it was mine and it was
a voice in my head saying you know this
is wrong
this isn't gonna work this is gonna move
the business backwards but I needed to
be right and so I kept fighting for it I
ended up getting my way my partner's
left and I was like the [__] am i doing
like I know that what I just convinced
them to do will move us backwards so do
I want to be right or do I want to be
rich and finally I realized Jesus man if
I could build my self-esteem around
something else then I could actually
achieve my goals but if I was focused on
just being right that I was never going
to get where I wanted to go and when I
look at the screaming that's happening
right now I I don't think it ends in
actually improving this situation I
don't think that by the rhetoric that
I'm seeing about like defunding cops
know that that we're actually going to
get to the beautiful place that I think
people want to get to so it's like
you're not going to be able to figure
out how to actually solve the problem
unless somebody can propose hey let's
defund the police okay Brad let's look
at that hey no this is what we need to
do over here cool let's look at that
like when you can actually stop and look
at it you can get to the goal but like I
said at the beginning most people don't
know what their actual goal is they
can't state it and then on top of that
they're so worried about being right or
sticking to the party line or whatever
that they're they're not in this
dialectic where you're bringing like
Lincoln with his team of rivals I was
like that's so powerful in a business I
go way out of my way to make sure that
my team challenges my thinking that if
you're an intern challenge me if you
think I'm saying something stupid
[__] tell me because I might be
actually being stupid and I have so much
on the line all I care about is the
truth and
that's like one of those things it will
be better for you you will be happier if
you focus on actually getting what you
want but it is it's one of those things
man the physics of being human
by default people want to be right by
default doesn't mean that they can't
switch it up and change but Jesus by
default people want to be right
there's this TED talk this woman gave
it's one of my favorite TED talks and I
think it's called on being wrong it was
a she was describing a book she had
written which was studying the
psychology of humans experience of being
wrong and she asked the audience what
does it feel like to be wrong and people
said embarrassing shameful whatever and
she goes no that's what it feels like to
find out you were wrong haha you like to
be wrong is to feel right right
typically where we're at we actually
think we were right about stuff were
wrong about that's instead what it was
like as righteousness
and so you were fortunate in that you
knew you were full of [__] right that
was actually fortunate most people when
they are righteous and adamant and
filled with you know passion and
certainty actually think they're right
that's much more dangerous because then
it becomes harder to reflect on what the
[__] am i doing do you think they have
unease or they are are there people who
truly have no sense
okay so memes live in complexes that
create worldviews it are self
perpetuating and self reinforcing so
let's say we take a particular
fundamentalist religious mean Plex and
there's a bunch of different ideas
there's ideas about if I die in holy war
then I go to heaven and there's eternal
life and there's hell and so I've got
both I've got all of the evolutionary
biology on punishment motives plus
reward motives plus authority motives
plus the desire for certainty plus
in-group stuff plus the desire to not be
out grouped right it's appealing to
every level of Maslow's hierarchy every
emotional aspect of evolutionary biology
but then you've you've got core memes
you've got supportive memes you have
protector memes like a whole football
team and the protector moons are
anything that would [__] up believing
that there is
way to deal with it right so doubt comes
from the devil and will make you burn in
hell forever and faith is the highest
virtue which basically says critical
thinking is evil and creates maximum
limbic fear for you so the prefrontal
cortex that would try and do the
critical thinking will end up
stimulating the amygdala to shut off the
prefrontal cortex and so that's actually
a very neurologically advanced protector
moon complex to make sure that the thing
that could get you to question if all
these beliefs are actually unfounded
gibberish won't be effective against you
and so most worldviews have protector
means built-in and so that even if I'm
feeling uncomfortable I have a way of
rationalizing it do you
so I've heard you talk about this before
and I thought this is so brilliant how
do you go from Jesus saying all the
lovely things bringing people together
to fighting the Crusades in his name
like how you do the mental gymnastics do
you know like what was the protector
meme in that meme complex that allowed
people to pull that off when the SS
troupe were being tried in The Hague for
war crimes after World War two I don't
remember the exactly the questions were
phrased but they were being asked
questions to determine to try to
understand the phenomena of what
happened how Germany that had been very
actual liberal before moved into that
place and also the likelihood for those
people to commit similar actions again
and so they were asked all the questions
specific to the situation they were in
but then they were asked general
questions of the type did you believe
everything you were doing was right and
one of the things are so fascinating was
something like 90% of the Nazi said no I
didn't believe everything I was doing
was right I did at the beginning when we
were hearing about what an oppressed
people we were and the bad people that
were trying to oppress us and the Jews
seemed to be rich when we were poor as
[__] in the land Republic and had to be
selling our kids into slavery and like
it seemed like they were doing it
consciously and we were just standing up
for ourselves and so originally I did
but then we started to get into places
that were really [__]
and so 90% of them said no I didn't
think it was alright then they're asked
did you ever try and stop and a hundred
percent of them said no I never tried to
stop and then when they were asked why
they would quote German phrases that had
been drilled into their heads who were
basically officers orders and if I if I
went against this I'd be putting the gas
chamber and I wouldn't have made any
difference like the whale saying if I
don't do it somebody else will right and
I have my kids to deal with and I didn't
have the power to stop it and the and
yet ninety percent of the people
actually felt that way right so the same
is true with the Inquisition's or the or
the Crusades or the and it's even true
today of if you grow up in a very
religious area what is what happens if
you give up on the religion right so we
know what the punishment for apostasy
and fundamentalist Islam is but if you
grew up in Utah in the strict Mormon
area and you give up on Mormonism then
you get excommunicated depending upon
how they relate to it you lose all of
the benefits your in-group completely
destroys maybe the idea that you're
going to lose heaven and all those kinds
of things so people believe things less
because they are true and more because
they are useful than they realize useful
and staying in the group staying in the
good graces meeting some need mostly
people believe things because it seems
like it will meet some need for them or
believing something else will damage
that need and then they rationally
backfill epistemology but they didn't do
a pistol nology to come to the belief
they emotionally came to the belief and
then they backfill epistemology so
rationalizing is the opposite of being
rational being rational is not starting
those well synced being rational is
starting with I don't know let's go
through the process let's try what are
all the hypotheses what is the evidence
for all the hypotheses rationalizing is
I jump straight to belief and now I'm
going to try to create backfilled
rationale for it and pretend that that's
how I got there I'll give you actually a
really interesting example one
the things the political left and the US
likes to do is make fun of the political
right for being stupid you can see this
with Bill Maher or other kinds of
comedians and it's part of their
narrative warfare strategy feeling
superior through being more educated and
whatever and and the political rate has
it's methods of narrative warfare and so
I'm not commenting on the rightness or
not of the underlying ideas but the the
weaponry that's genius
and nobody wants to feel really stupid
and so you actually stay in group by
laughing at the people who are on the
out group as opposed to defending the
people who are so obviously stupid that
you're obviously stupid if you would
even sympathize with them at all right
so that's actually appealing to very not
rational things in-group out-group
desire not to seem stupid in the name of
higher intellect so it's very tricky and
sophisticated so there's a left comedian
who went to some Trump rallies recently
and interviewed Trump supporters and
made a compilation of how utterly stupid
Trump supporters are now of course he
didn't include any of the places where
there Trump supporters that are well
educated and have good philosophy and
there are other ones that will show
right oriented people going to a bunch
of left or and Tifa people and making
them look like utter idiot so they'll
both use that tactic right so of course
the first thing we have to see is as
we're laughing at the dumb Trump
supporters in this thing it was cherry
picked for that purpose of all of the
people to then give the sense that that
was ubiquitous that they're all that
done right okay so you watch the thing
and it's actually impressive how much
these people have rejected there's
actually pride around
anti-intellectualism within this
population there's a particular part of
the right that has a anti intellectual
pride and so they the guy is you know
saying very basic things about
government or how bill becomes a law or
whatever intentionally like showing how
stupid the people are that they don't
know the basics of politics and they're
certain of wrong things and whatever and
then tries to take it further and says
if if if Trump used the n-word would you
vote for him yeah I'd still vote for him
if he whatever and they ran different
thing
and at one point it said something like
if Trump said that everyone need to
start [__] pigs would you vote for
him yea I'd still vote for him and what
it was trying to say isn't that guy who
says yeah I'd still vote for him is
saying my mind is not open to new ideas
like my mind has closed to new ideas I
have already made my decision I'm going
with it so you have to say what made him
get there well one of the things that's
actually insightful is he intuited in
someplace that he couldn't make sense of
what was going on and when the pundits
were talking it was above his head and
that they were trying to use
intellectualism and data and statistics
and whatever to say things that felt
like they were gonna [__] his world up
that weren't in his interest right that
seemed against his interest and so he
basically said I know my mind he's not
this sophisticated but subconsciously I
know my mind is a battleground of people
more sophisticated than me who are gonna
try to convince me what is true but I
don't think they have my interest in
mind so this Trump guy it doesn't matter
if it's true or not I actually feel
safer being on his side in a world that
feels like it's in more he feels more
like me and he feels like he might win
and I don't want the susceptibility of
people trying to confuse me to be
possible so it's very interesting to see
how the that anti intellectual thing was
actually a compensating weapon of
intellectual weapons being used to
control people in ways that they could
tell weren't fully in their interest
that that's really interesting and this
is where cognitive distribution to make
it sound fancy the fact that sadly not
all mines are created equal it's like
man when you have like when I look at
people that are clearly smarter than me
I'm just like dude this is deeply
problematic to try to make sense of what
they're saying and to engage with what
they're saying it is I get it man I feel
for people when it it you you can tell
you're being moved around the board like
a chess piece and you're not sure like
where the trap is coming
but you know that there is a trap coming
and hold on one second because I have an
alarm going off
all right sorry about that I am normally
I don't film this late so I didn't even
think to check my bad
so yeah when you've got somebody that is
just you know outperforming you and you
can feel that you're being moved around
that chess board it is so disconcerting
that I can see how people would end up
shutting down and so this is why we like
debates as we think okay that guy is
saying something that I seem to disagree
with but he's smarter than me I want to
put my smart or candidate up to battle
with him right and the higher angel of
our nature is wanting to actually
understand by them going back and forth
and then being smart enough to come up
with the counters that we wouldn't have
known the lower angels of our nature is
just watching a dog fight and that's why
you'll see sam harris eviscerates noam
chomsky or whatever those type of title
that go around it's really those people
when they're watching aren't trying to
learn they're trying to and that's why
you'll see in a debate the people who
are very very strong fans of one of the
people are sure that person one at the
end on both sides so our mind really
moved because that's actually not
appealing to the higher angels of their
epistemic Drive but the lower angels of
their desire because this is the thing
there isn't some way at the end to
determine which one is actually right
clearly so the guy who's making the
arguments of the people who resonate
with the type of arguments he likes his
arguments resonate with him is true and
the other one don't resonate is true and
ultimate leave my sense of truthiness is
kind of a felt sense dude let me tell
you as somebody who does a lot of public
speaking I will tell you right now that
I can move an audience by changing not
what I say but how I say it and I
learned very early on that by putting
time and energy into getting good at the
performative layer of a talk mm made a
huge difference and so when I was young
I wanted to be a stand-up comic and so I
spent a lot of time in front of
audiences I spent a lot of time
practicing like what I was doing with my
face modulating my voice and it is it is
a little it's exciting when you
feel like you're doing things for the
right reasons but it's a little
unnerving when I think about like
charisma goes a long way man just by the
way that you make somebody feel they
always say you don't remember what
somebody did or what they said you
remember how they made you feel and so
if you can make somebody feel good if
you can hype them up and I tell
audiences all the time and this is sort
of the core friction of my life is I
have what I call a two-hour declining
arc of influence so if you if you get me
in a room with somebody my whole thing
is get me in the room if you give me the
room I will [__] make somebody feel
something I can be very persuasive when
I really believe in something and I'm
really passionate because I can bring
that out and I can energy infects other
people and so you can infect them with
your enthusiasm you can get them hyped
up but as soon as I walk away it's like
it that sense of like because I try to
give people the sense that they can do
it right whatever it is like you can do
it you can make it come true and let me
tell you and I know that when I walk
away that feeling begins to wane and so
it's like how do you get beyond just the
the ability to whip people into an
emotional frenzy and actually get them
to think critically to form an opinion
to say okay I actually think I
understand how these pieces work
together and then it's like you can
begin to form your own opinion then you
can you know how to move to a world but
otherwise how to do that for your
listeners right now how to please how
because similar this conversation might
have some impact on them for like a day
maybe right but the moment they have
scrolled their Facebook feed they've
forgotten about it and they're now fully
inundated with other things and so how
why would why do we bother doing this at
all so if someone is feeling a
particular kind of resonance and
inspiration they have to take some
actions it will keep it feeding or
nurturing that and so let's talk about a
few things people can do because when
you're in the room with them whether
it's just that you're giving them better
information or you're emotionally
influencing them they're influenced by
what they're around and so if some but
then when you leave they're influenced
by whatever they're around next what
you're trying to do is make them have
more
a internal locus of control to be more
self influencing well the the kind of
influence I would say illegitimate power
in a game be sense illegitimate power is
where I'm trying to influence people
towards my agenda perpetually legitimate
power is where I'm trying to influence
them to be more self directing which is
basically what a good parent or a
teacher is trying to do is to increase
someone's capacity to make their own
good sense making their own good
decisions and whereas to the degree that
I'm trying to convince them what to
think that aligns with an agenda I have
that is a you know game theoretic thing
that will then produce counter responses
of other people who want to convince
some of some other thing but as people
are seeking to become more
self-determined the first thing is to
recognize how much you are not self
determined to recognize how much the
information streams coming into your
eyes and ears and who you around
influences and start changing that one
of the best acts of self-determination
is to change the things other than you
that are influencing you and so we
talked about the problem of social media
if you care about your own well-being
enough you'll just quit social media
your own well-being in your ability to
understand the world and you'll start
finding sources of news that are better
than social media that aren't AI curated
for limbic optimization for you but that
you're curating based on what seems to
be good information and you'll find left
sources and right sources and sources
from other countries and whatever to try
to make sense of stuff if you are going
to stay on social media there are some
things you can do to do a better job
which is let's say that you are
politically aligned in a direction
you're left aligned go find all of the
right thinkers and follow them and join
a bunch of those groups if you're right
aligned do that with the left whatever
your particular perspective is and find
the ones that seem to be the most
actually smart and earnest and then
unfollow all the stuff that seems to be
salacious and not well researched so
that your feed becomes the smartest
stuff from all of the perspectives and
if this is working you'll become less
certain about everything you'll know
that it is working because you will know
more than you knew before and you'll be
less certain whereas right now you know
less and you're more certain yeah that I
think that's really powerful and the
thing I I'm really obsessed with this
idea I want people to understand that
what I normally say is skills have
utility but information has utility and
man I don't care
from where on the political spectrum an
idea comes from if it's real if it has
real-world implications and it lets me
move towards a goal that I have I'm
gonna take it and I actually cannot
understand anything else
so it's there they're powerful I didn't
this all came for me because of building
businesses like when your house is on
the line you don't have time to worry
about whether you thought of the idea or
somebody else thought of the idea or
somebody you like thought of it or
somebody you don't like thought of it
it's just like Jesus dude I don't wanna
have to go home and tell my wife that we
have to move out because we'd lost the
house like that was such a real thing
for me and that kicked me into just a
and I had already been sort of marching
down that path but that kicked me into a
whole nother level of like I just need
to know what works man I need to know
what works I have a goal I need to know
what's gonna move me towards that goal
and it also it felt better like there
there's a sense of relaxing because I'm
not trying to posture I'm not trying to
campaign I used to say all the time and
unfortunately I was wrong about this but
I used to say all the time to people
just be good because you can't campaign
and convince people that you're good now
the sad reality is you actually can you
can bamboozle a lot of [__] people
with a lot of words but being good
itself is gonna take you a lot farther
and the getting people interested in
that like gamifying in themselves like
okay cool I want this curated feed that
is bringing me a diverse array of
opinions so that I can actually function
and if people got into that idea of
functioning but the goal here is to
function it's to actually be useful to
be able to
so I define power very differently than
you but the way that I define power and
maybe it's just the wrong word at least
for this conversation is power is being
able to close your eyes imagine a world
better than this one open your eyes and
actually have the skills to move towards
that to make that real and I have become
so obsessed with that idea that it helps
like that becomes almost the filter by
which I make sense of the world like if
I really think about like what's what's
one of my highest level filters it's
like I only do and believe that which
moves me towards my goals and if you're
good at choosing your goal then you
suddenly become open to any good idea
from wherever even if it contradicts
like I came into it thinking one thing
but like whoa that's actually more
that's real that's actually going to
take me it's not something I ever
thought like I never thought that and I
don't know enough about game B to know
if like I'm behind it or not but it's
like hey if game B ends up being the
most real thing and there is a way to
deal with the just freakish amount of
complexity and that we actually can
consciously build something that moves
us towards that and it becomes a my
values would definitely be
sustainability human well-being
like those are sort of inextricably
connected wanting the human race to go
on long after I'm here wanting people to
struggle but struggle well so that they
can be tough and be resilient like those
are all things that to me seem
inherently good more than say happiness
or something like that which is very
transient but like seeking out the
things that will actually get me there
and the process of iteration and at the
risk of just completely derailed on
tangents here that to me that sort of
mixture of like iterate get it out there
try be sincere in the pursuit of what's
actually going to move you towards your
goal like that is you know if I had
magic fairy dust that could sprinkle on
people to get them to act in accordance
with that I think they would be happier
and it certainly would lead to a better
world in my estimation this is
interesting and at the risk of opening a
very big can of worms
did do I remember right that you said
that it isn't necessarily true that
improving the individual will improve
Society or am i miss remembering that it
is not necessarily true that improving
some subset of individuals in a
particular way will improve society like
okay someone getting better at violin is
improving them it's improving their
skills someone getting better at warfare
is improving their skills so is society
the result of the quality of the members
yes but are the members also the result
of the quality of the civilization
systems like the education and the
economics and the culture and the
governance that help condition and
develop them also yes so it's not just
bottom up individuals to society or just
top down the quality of a society of
oak's different things from individuals
there's a recursion there so I but I
don't think there's a tangent there I
doing that go down I want to go back to
something you said a moment ago when you
were talking about the desire to be
right and how problematic that was and
when you let that go you go in that way
makes you very easy to control because
all I have to do is appeal to your
desire to feel right and I can control
you I can give you information that I
have taken more time than you have the
process to frame it up that will make
you feel right and I can do pick what
you believe I can also inflame you into
emotion by attacking your sense of
rightness or whatever so having a
fragile ego that wants to seem right and
that is fragile II identified with
certain positions makes you very very
vulnerable to control so that's an
important thing having a mindset where
anything can be brought up and your
identities not attached to specific
belief structures the belief could
change and you don't crumble as a result
of it makes you much more resilient
yeah resiliency is is one of those
things from an intrinsic standpoint that
if people want that in themselves and
they're actually willing to put that to
use you can begin to get anti fragile
and anti fragility in terms of building
a new society I know is a is going to be
a pretty important thing do you think
that we have any ideas that could
actually cause so antifragility for
anybody that's never heard the phrase
before the more you attack it the
stronger it becomes so what on earth
would that look like at the societal
level I I it is a failure of imagination
for me I can't imagine it capitalism has
been anti-federal as a system of
resource distribution and etc it it has
continued to evolve its capacities so we
went from say barter to exchange
mediated by currency to fiat currency to
fractional reserve vehicles the attacks
upon it that made it stronger well if
one capitalist group say another nation
or whatever was trying to advance their
overall share of the pie relative to
another one they kept each strengthening
their underlying capitalist base
becoming better at extraction exchange
those types of things when communism was
emerging as an alternate system it
increased its capacity to be productive
and defend itself and whatever so that's
an example of antifragility you were
asking earlier how does someone go from
the forgiveness of Jesus to the to the
Crusades there was a belief system
Christianity they continued to get
stronger and buy stronger it meant as it
was attacked by other religious
ideologies or or political ideologies it
was increasing its and this actually
interesting because anti fragile is not
always good because sometimes it just
means the thing is getting better at
warfare
I actually want to bring up the Trump
campaign has elements of antifragility
so whether it was stormy Daniels or the
Russia issue or the impeachment his base
actually got stronger through each of
those and so one of the things that the
left has not recognized they failed to
recognize the antifragility and that
they were lobbying attacks that would
lose but would actually strengthen and
so that's such an important thing to
recognize because if something has
become antique red jewel and you think
it's bad you're going against it you
have to think in a different way and
actually I'll use Trump as an example
here the thing you were mentioning
around listening to diverse opinions so
we we know that he's a different kind of
president and the politically trained
ones that have been there before whether
people think that he is saving the
nation from the corrupt evil deep state
or whether he is destroying it to create
his own evil dynasty is one of the
classically polarized things that people
have a hard time
grounding enough they grounded in the
thing that resonates is true to them
without seeing the other things but I
think everyone knows he's been effective
at a particular thing I know a couple
people who have been who worked with him
closely been on the Security Council or
you know in his advisory board who've
said the same thing about their
experience working with him in the
presidential or what said one same thing
and I found very interesting is that
where most of the president's previously
had positions that were fairly
consistent and predictable Bush did kind
of Bush things and Obama did kind of
Obama things and they got people around
them that had a similar ideology and
that had for some period of time right
the Obama Democrats before they were
Obama Democrats were Clinton Democrats
they were of a certain type and same in
Bush Republicans Trump got people who
were mostly not of that of a particular
lineage system and he got people who
disagreed with each other via mentally
and so if he would bring
at Reyes into a room and Bannon into a
room together to talk about China
because they both knew more about it
than he didn't he knew that but they
disagreed vehemently then what they what
I was told would happen in the room is
that he would invite a group of people
in without giving them any events notice
of what they were going to talk about so
they couldn't prepare how to manipulate
while thinking so he got their
extemporaneous real sense he brought in
people who disagreed he would ask a
question without giving an indication of
what he thought he'd keep a poker face
on the whole time to not indicate that
what he believed and you just keep
asking questions and have them fight it
out and and he would actually sit there
quietly and listen for a couple hours
and once he had heard enough then he
still wouldn't tell them what he thought
he'd go straight to Twitter because he
didn't care if they agreed with him or
not he cared of his support base did and
Twitter gave him an innocent way to
communicate with the support base and
get real-time analytics based on the big
data analysis of the Twitter feed of
whether what he was saying was
coalescing his support base or not Wow
and so that is an effective technology
where what he's doing is listening to
different viewpoints now he was
listening for is not necessarily what is
true but will be effective for
coalescing my support base but he also
had much more direct communication with
people and much faster feedback now also
when you don't have a position kind of
like Bruce Lee said about martial arts
right when you don't have a fixed form
when you don't have rigorous positions
you can take the position that is
coalescing the support base empirical
more which is both terrible and
wonderful depending upon what your whole
is woo man so yeah this is I'm I'm I'm
not surprised by this conversation given
that you are the person I came across
when researching the end of the world
and how civilizations crumble dude the
way that you are taking the entire
ecosystem of things that have to be
taken into consideration into
consideration it is it is very
interesting I'm gonna be watching you
very carefully with what you continue to
put out in terms of game be and how we
move forward intelligently I think we're
in a
weird time but dude thank you for coming
on the show thank you for and maybe you
would warn me against us but thank you
for being a part of my sense making
apparatus I will not take you literally
I will definitely look things up and
form my own opinions but man you
definitely fall into the category of
people that I think are saying things in
a rational way a metered way that makes
a lot of sense to me so word thank you
it's good to be here it's fun to have
the conversation with you dude no joke
hopefully we will connect again soon and
thanks again everybody if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe so I can
[__] up your algorithm and until next
time my friends the legendary take care
the decisions we make in the next 20
years 20-30 years are going to have
enduring consequences of the sort that
previous decisions did not we need to
figure out how the problems that could
that could threaten our extinction won't
extinct us we need to figure out how to
avoid an anarchic society we need to
figure out how to avoid it this topic
society we need to do all this in a span
of it's a couple decades